Spanning the entire width of the African continent
from Senegal to Eritrea by the Red Sea, the Sahel
Region forms the southern transition zone from
the Great Desert, the Sahara, to the Sudanian
Savannah. Dominated by shrubs and grasses, the
Sahel is generally hot and barren, and typically
not considered particularly habitable. Examining
the area’s satellite photography however,
a few pockets of greenery defy the semi-arid
step with the border region between Nigeria,
Niger, Chad and Cameroon being the most colorful
outlier. This harbour of life is called Lake Chad
and it tells a fascinating story about the
fragility and resilience of mother nature and
gives insights into the grand planetary cycles
that shape the climate and life on planet earth.
Chapter 1) Lake Chad today
During the peak of the wet season,
Lake Chad covers around 18.000 square kilometers,
comparable to the size of Lake Ontario, when you
include the seasonally flooded vegetation
between the deeper bowls. With a water depth
ranging from just a few centimeters to just 11
meters at its deepest sections, Lake Chad is
extremely susceptible to size changes, whenever
the balance of inflow and evaporation changes.
Most of the water in Lake Chad comes
from the Logone and Chari Rivers,
whose furthest tributaries reach all the way from
Cameroon, across the Central African Republic to
the southern most parts of Sudan. Rain in
the Highlands around the sources of these
tributaries is highly variable throughout the
year, leading to discharge variations from around
8 cubic meters per second during the dry season to
almost 5000 cubic meters per second at the peak.
These variations are shooting an annual pulse
into the Chad basin, making the lake expand
and recede like the lungs of central Africa.
The area we call Lake Chad today is actually
split between two shallow basins that stretch
for over 200 kilometres from north to south.
The core of Lake Chad is located in the south
where the Chari River contributes around 95%
of the lake's water balance, while the north has
the Yobe river contributing the remaining water.
For most of the year, the two basins
act as separate wetland complexes,
which are separated by the so-called Great
Barrier, a mud sill lying around 1 to 1.5
meter above the normal level of the southern
basin. Only during particularly wet seasons
does the main lake rise enough to breach this
barrier, extending Lake Chad across both basins.
Unlike the lakes as we know them in temperate
climates, with a clear boundary between the wet
and the dry, Lake Chad is more of a complex
wetland ecosystem than a lake. Hundreds of
kilometers of seasonally submerged grassland, and
extensive dunes reaching into the permanent lake
body create a fluid network of dry and wet,
where clear borders are hard to determine.
This is one of the main reasons why there are
so many different figures describing the size
of this lake and the 18.000 square
meter I have used in the beginning
of the video should be taken with caution.
With fluctuating extents of water in the basin,
the extent of vegetation is also constantly
bargaining with external influences.
Mostly contained in the designated Ramsar Wetland
region, today around 5200 square kilometers of the
basin have permanent vegetation cover with
paper reed and the floating Pistia covering
the largest swaths, while Acacia Trees and Palms
are more concentrated around the wetlands shores.
Where there is water, there are typically also
humans and for Lake Chad there is no exception.
Looking at the lake, its surrounding wetland
and the vast tributary systems as a whole,
the livelihood of a total of 30 million
people depends on the basin’s waters,
of which there isn’t very much, bringing us to…
Chapter 2) Human influence on Lake Chad
Since the 1950s, the populations in all countries
surrounding the Chad basin have been exploding.
The country Chad for example went from 2.5 million
people in 1950 to over 21 million in 2025, meaning
an 8.5 fold increase. The extra demand for water,
food, fuel and land has had detrimental impacts
on Lake Chad, which has been dramatically
reduced within a single human lifetime.
When the lake was first photographed through
satellite imagery in 1963, it appeared as a vast,
almost continuous sheet of water with dune
islands scattered around the eastern flanks.
Since then however, the construction of dams in
the upstream regions of the Chari River and water
diversion for irrigation in the whole drainage
basin threw off the water balance significantly.
In combination with generally reduced rainfall in
the 1960s and 70s, this led to a near collapse of
the lake by the end of the 1980s. With increased
rainfall in the following decades, water levels
have stabilized somewhat, but with virtually no
effective sustainability policies to protect the
lake, and with irrigation and population still
expanding, the same threats persist to this day.
People around Lake Chad have not just tapped
into the water balance of the lake however,
but also significantly altered the land use and
ecological composition of the basin as a whole.
Until the end of the 19th century, the typical
African Savannah megafauna was grazing and hunting
around the shores of Lake Chad. With the advent
of colonialism however, intensified hunting for
ivory, skins and meat has disrupted the natural
fauna. These atrocities, paired with habitat loss
from the growing population and the ongoing
droughts in the middle of the 20th century,
led to an almost complete localized extinction
around Lake Chad of these animals by 1990.
Replaced by cattle, goats and sheep, the
newly introduced megafauna has transformed
a once‑diverse savannah into a more homogeneous,
overgrazed and erosion‑prone landscape, which in
turn has further degraded the remaining wetlands.
Overall, human use hasn’t been too kind on Lake
Chad’s ecological health, but zooming out to a
larger timeline and the wider Bodele Depression,
we are not the only force that drastically
altered Lake Chad’s appearance. Hundreds of
kilometers away from the current lake shores and
surrounding the deepest parts of the Chad Basin,
ancient dried out landforms emerged from satellite
imagery, with spits, beach ridges and fluvial
deposits of former river deltas tracing out the
existence of an enormous body of of water that
is no more, bringing us to
Chapter 3) The Mega-Chad
The very first hints that the Sahara and Sahel
zone may not always have looked like they do
today, came from early explorers in the late
19th century. A group of British explorers in
the southern mountains of Libya and Algeria
came across cave paintings, whose depictions
went against everything we thought we knew. Vivid
imagery of lush savannah and herding animals were
galloping across the cave walls, which today
is a sight that can’t be found for thousands
of kilometers from these caves. The paintings
are dated back to roughly 10.000 years ago,
which implies that these regions must have looked
completely different during that time, for early
humans to be familiar with these kinds of scenes.
These observations kicked off investigations into
earth's larger climate cycles, and culminated into
the description of Milankovic cycles in the 1920s.
According to the astronomer Milutin Milankovic,
earth’s orbit around the sun is not as constant
as once expected and the wobbles in the orbit
and spin, influenced by gravitational pull from
other planets over tens of thousands of years can
drastically reshape the distribution of sunlight
on Earth’s surface and, with it, the climate.
Cycles in orbital eccentricity at 100.000 to
400.000 years, axial tilt at 41.000 years and
precession at 21.000 years create a complex
but predictable pattern for global exposure to
the sun’s energy, and are the foundation for
understanding the larger natural climate
patterns on the planet such as ice ages,
changes to the global ocean currents and
the expansion and contractions of deserts.
Backtracking the impacts of the Milankovic cycles
on the Sahara, reveals that this vast barren
desert must have cycled between humid savannah and
arid desert many times in earth’s history, with
the last wet cycle ending around 5.000 years ago.
During this African Humid Period, lasting from
around 15.000 to 5.000 years ago, several
large lakes and floodplains were scattered
around today’s Sahara, with enormous river
networks building a network of grass,
wet and woodlands. Of these networks and drainage
basins, Lake Mega-Chad was by far the largest,
spanning a total over 400.000 square kilometers,
over one and a half times larger than all American
Great Lakes combined and even surpassing
today’s largest lake, the Caspian Sea.
The extent of the Ancient Lake Mega-Chad can still
be identified on satellite imagery and topographic
maps today, with spits, beach ridges and fluvial
deposits of former river deltas tracing out the
former lake shores. Covering the entirety
of the Bodele Depression of today’s Chad,
the lake had a maximum depth of 180 meters in its
northeastern section. In these deeper waters, the
fresh and brackish waters housed an abundance of
aquatic life, with the single celled algae called
diatoms forming the base of the food web. The
ample sunlight in the region has produced billions
of tons of these microalgae, who after their
roughly 1 week lifespan sink to the seafloor,
creating a thick layer of nutrient rich sediments
across the whole basin. Their silica shells and
the minerals bound up in these ancient lake beds
form the raw material for one of the most peculiar
global connections that I have come across.
After the waters of Lake Mega-Chad have receded,
the now hardened silica-rich sediments are
exposed in the Bodele Depression.There,
a unique alignment of mountains with the Tibesti
and Ennedi massifs on either side, forms a
natural wind tunnel that continuously funnels
strong gusts through, scouring the surface.
The brittle sediment layers are then easily
eroded and made airborne as dust particles,
creating gigantic pillars of dust over the basin.
These clouds are then picked up by the prevailing
trade winds along the equator, carried
over the entirety of the Atlantic ocean,
to eventually rain down and fertiles the Amazon
Basin, fueling and replenishing the nutrient
balance of the largest rainforest of the planet.
The Bodele depression is the largest dust source
on the planet, and it is estimated that 20
to 30 million tons of dust are arriving on
the other side of the planet each year,
creating new life out of the remnants of
Africa’s now decimated green and blue heart.
On the other side of the equator however,
enormous tectonic forces have created new
basins with an abundance of life lurking within,
called the African Great lakes. If you want to
learn more how these habitats are withstanding the ever
changing circumstances of the African Continent,
I can recommend this video about Lake Malawi,
or watch what YouTube thinks is best for you
here. Also, if you want to further support
the work I am doing on this channel, you
can now leave a small donation on my buy
me a coffee page here, or with the link in the
description. See you in the next one, cheers.